ODRA(3) follow its predecessors is a next generation development tool for future database application programmers. The tool is based on SBQL. The SBQL execution environment consists of a virtual machine, a main memory DBMS and an infrastructure supporting distributed computing.

The main goal of the ODRA(3) project is to develop new paradigms of database application development. This goal can be reached by increasing the level of abstraction at which a programmer works with application of a new, universal, declarative programming language, together with its distributed, database-oriented and object-oriented execution environment. Such an approach provides a functionality common to the variety of popular technologies (such as relational/object databases, several types of middleware, general purpose programming languages and their execution environments) in a single universal, easy to learn, interoperable and effective to use application programming environment. The principle ideas implemented in order to achieve this goal are the following:
  * Object-oriented design. Despite the principal role of object-oriented ideas in software modelling and in programming languages, these ideas have not succeeded yet in the field of databases. ODRA approach is different from current ways of perceiving object databases, represented mostly by the ODMG standard and database-related Java technologies. The system is built upon the SBA methodology. This allows to introduce for database programming all the popular object-oriented mechanisms (like objects, classes, inheritance, polymorphism, encapsulation), as well as some mechanisms previously unknown (like dynamic object roles or interfaces based on database views).
  * Powerful query language extended to a programming language. The most important feature of ODRA is SBQL, an object-oriented query and programming language. SBQL differs from programming languages and from well-known query languages, because it is a query language with the full computational power of programming languages. SBQL alone makes possible to create fully fledged database-oriented applications. A chance to use the same very-high-level language for most database application development tasks may greatly improve programmers’ efficiency, as well as software stability, performance and maintenance potential.
  * Virtual repository as a middleware. In a networked environment it is possible to connect several hosts running ODRA. All systems tied in this manner can share resources in a heterogeneous and dynamically changing, but reliable and secure environment. This approach to distributed computing is based on object-oriented virtual updatable database views. Views are used as wrappers (or mediators) on top of local servers, as a data integration facility for global applications, and as customisers that adopt global resources to needs of particular client applications. This technology can be perceived as contribution to distributed databases, Enterprise Application Integration (EAI), Grid Computing and peer-to-peer networks.

The distributed nature of contemporary information systems requires highly specialised software facilitating communication and interoperability between applications in a networked environment. Such software is usually referred to as middleware and is used for application integration. ODRA supports information-oriented and service-oriented application integration. The integration can be achieved through several techniques known from research on distributed/federated databases. The key feature of ODRA-based middleware is the concept of transparency. Due to this transparency many complex technical details of the distributed data/service environment need not to be taken into account in an application code. ODRA supports the following transparency forms:
  * Access and location transparency;
  * Updating transparency made from the side of a global client;
  * Distribution and heterogeneity transparency;
  * Data fragmentation transparency;
  * Data/service redundancies and replications transparency;
  * Data indexing transparency;
  * etc.
These forms of transparency have not been solved to a satisfactory degree by current technologies. Transparency is achieved in ODRA through the concept of
a virtual repository. The repository seamlessly integrates distributed resources and provides a global view on the whole system, allowing one to utilise
distributed software resources (e.g., databases, services, applications) and hardware (processor speed, disk space, network, etc.). It is responsible for the global
administration and security infrastructure, global transaction processing, communication mechanisms, ontology and metadata management. The repository also
facilitates data access by several redundant data structures (global indexes, global caches, replicas), and protects data against random system failures.

A user of the repository sees data exposed by the systems integrated by means of the virtual repository through a global integration view. The main role of the integration view is to hide complexities of mechanisms involved in access to local and remote data sources. The view implements a CRUD behaviour which can be augmented with logic responsible for dealing with horizontal and vertical fragmentation, replication, network failures, etc. Thanks to the declarative nature of SBQL, these complex mechanisms can often be expressed in one line of code.

Local sites are fully autonomous, which means it is not necessary to change them in order to make their content visible to the global user of the repository. Their content is visible to global clients through a set of contributory views which must conform to the integration view (be a subset of it). Non-ODRA data sources are available to global clients through a set of wrappers, which map data stored in them to the canonical object model assumed for ODRA. There are wrappers developed for several popular databases, languages and middleware technologies.

Despite of their diversity, they can all be made available to global users of the repository. A global user may not only query local data sources, but also update their content using SBQL. Instead of exposing raw data, the repository designer may decide to expose only procedures. Calls to such procedures can be executed synchronously and asynchronously. Together with SBQL’s support for semi-structured data, this feature enables a document-oriented interaction, which is characteristic to current technologies supporting Service Oriented Architecture (SOA).

ODRA(3) is currently under development by researchers from Computer Engineering Department of Technical University of Lodz, Poland and Software Engineering Department of Polish-Japanese Institute of Information Technology, Warsaw, Poland.